hey y'all it's Jess welcome back to
Region refuge farm there's a beautiful
spring morning here and today I am going
to be putting in the rest of my tomato
plants for the 2019 summer garden I've
been getting a lot of questions lately
about planting tomatoes I've shared them
to pass some of my tips and growing
advice for growing tomatoes I love to
grow tomatoes it's my favorite thing to
grow in the garden and so today I just
wanted to do a quick video showing you
guys my methods for planting tomatoes
and just answer some of these questions
that I've been getting a lot lately
first things first let's go ahead and
put this little guy in the ground and
then I'll talk to you a little bit about
spacing pruning and trellising
[Music]
how you put your tomato plant in the
ground this is pretty universal I'm
gonna talk to you here in a minute about
the pruning and the trellising and those
things may vary based on your gardening
style where you're gardening but
planting your tomato plant in the ground
no matter if you plan on pruning it down
to one stem or just letting it
completely Bush out and go wild putting
it in the ground is the same tomato
plants like to be planted deep if you'll
look here up close with this plant
you'll see these little bumps and
nodules on the stem of this plant as
well as these very tiny hairlike fibers
and if you'll notice these fibers go
all the way up the stem of this plant up
here to the top Tomatoes actually if you
let them grow on their own if you don't
intervene if you don't trellis them
stake them up tie them up they actually
grow along the ground and they are a
vining plant at least indeterminate
tomatoes are like this one and like most
of the ones that you're going to be
purchasing to plant to grow in your
garden and basically the way they grow
is that everywhere that their stem comes
in contact with the soil like whenever
this plant grows up and falls over and
grows along the ground they root all the
way along the stem that's what those
little fibers are those our future roots
so whenever you have a transplant like
this which I started this from seed in
my greenhouse a couple of months ago and
I pull it out of the cup you can see the
root system all in here and and this is
obviously as a healthy transplant but if
I were to just plant it in the ground to
here this is the only root system that
it would have and it would it would stem
off from this and it would probably do
okay
however the deeper that I plant this I'm
giving it this much more space to create
that healthy root system healthy roots
are going to make for healthy plants
that's the more nutrients they can take
in more water that they can take in so
basically any time that you're
transplanting a tomato plant it's best
to go ahead and pinch off the bottom
leaves and I like to do this all the way
up to the
top crown and I'm gonna dig a really
deep hole where I can put to just plant
in up to here now one trick you can do
and obviously did not do it this time if
you want to come out like the day before
you're planning on transplanting or two
days before and you want to lay your
plant down sideways in the bed just like
that tomato plants will always grow up
towards the Sun so if I leave that plant
laying on its side right here in the bed
you want to make sure it's well watered
before you do this because it can dry
out quickly in a day or two this stem
will be bent upwards so if you're if
you're planting in a bed maybe like a
raised bed where it might be difficult
to dig a hole that's 12 inches deep if
you if you do that trick laying them on
those side and letting them grow up
towards the Sun you can actually lay
them in the hole sideways and get that
stem under the ground without having to
worry about the stem breaking from you
bending it because you basically just
give it the time in the situation to
bend itself however I have no issue
digging a hole to the bottom of my
raised bed so I'm just gonna go straight
down with this guy today
so the soil in my raised beds the bottom
half is very mediocre topsoil it's
honestly pretty heavy and it's not great
however we don't till these beds we just
add a few inches of compost every year
and we have great success with that so
as you can see here I've got all this
compost on top I've dug the hole down
deep and basically even though the soil
is not great at the bottom of my bed I'm
gonna put my plant down in there and
then I'm gonna scrape all this compost
that's up on the top and over it so it's
gonna be surrounded by compost now my
single tomato trick the one thing that I
would say I always do with all of my
Tomatoes it's not from planting them
deeply is the egg and the whole trick I
don't know the science behind this I was
told years and years ago by an old man
that had garden in this area for 50
years to put an egg in the hole
whenever I plant my tomatoes and I did I
just just listened to him he seemed to
know what he's talking about a few years
ago however one of my Instagram
followers decided to do a little bit of
a test and she planted several tomatoes
of all the same variety same soil same
growing conditions and half of them she
gave the egg and half of them she didn't
it was the only variable that changed in
those plants and there was a marked
difference in the ones that had the egg
larger plants more fruit better
production I don't know it's one of
those things I've always done you know I
don't change it because I just imagine
you know the year that I don't put the
egg in the hole would be my first bad
tomato year I've ever had so I in the
past I wouldn't crack these and for the
most part when I would go to pull the
tomato plants up I might find a few
pieces of shell because the root system
would crack it however last year I did
have an egg that remained uncracked and
when I went to pull my tomatoes up it
was just a completely traumatic
experience so this year as I've dropped
these eggs in the hole
I've taken my shovel and not just
completely smash them but just to kind
of a little bit of a crack in the shell
to make sure that they have a little bit
of a head start
breaking down and again I've got the
leaves all broken off so this tomato
plant is going to go right down in that
hole and I'm going to push the compost
in all around it I'm going to go ahead
and take off the extra leaves so I've
just got this top crown of this plant
sticking out now one thing that
sometimes will happen when you are
planting and if you're not careful about
this it can cause issues with Tomatoes
you know sometimes you dig your hole and
like here as you can see there's a
little bit of a dip here and what I want
to avoid is is creating a situation
where water is going to be able to pull
up around this tomato because tomato
foliage is really susceptible to
sickness whenever it gets wet so
basically what I'm going to do when I
put this tomato in is I'm going to kind
of build the soil up right around it and
I'm actually going to dig out a little
bit of a moat around this plant not a
lot of big deal just a little bit to
create a bit of a hill so that when it
rains instead of the water pulling up
right around my plant it's gonna go off
here around the edge these basically if
you've created a dip and your Tomatoes
right in the middle the water will pull
up there and then if it continues to
rain it will splash that dirty water
back up on your leaves that's just a
perfect storm to end up with funguses
and and leaf spots and all the kinds of
things that you don't want with Tomatoes
however if you create this little this
little indent in this little moat it
will make the water flow away from the
tomato so you're not going to have as
much splash back but also it's going to
cause that water to soak in six inches
around the tomato and it's going to
encourage the root system to branch out
in order to soak that water up so again
you're encouraging healthier roots as
well as healthy foliage tomato plant in
the ground that tall plant barely any of
its sticking out it'll take a few days
for it to really settle in and then it
will start growing now at this point you
would normally go ahead
and give this plant a little bit of
water being careful to not just splash
it all over the leaves since they are so
close to the soil at this point however
I am going to be planting the rest of
this row of tomatoes here in just a
minute as soon as I'm done with this
video so I'm not going to go ahead and
water this plant right now now really
quick let's talk about pruning spacing
and trellising I live in Central
Arkansas of zone 7b and it's hot here
it's very very humid and it's very very
hot I actually had a conversation with a
man that lives in Ohio a few weeks ago
and we got on the topic of growing
tomatoes and he said that he grows his
tomatoes in big cages allows them to
completely Bush out as no pruning gives
them 4 feet of space all around and gets
bumper crops every year that would not
work here it's so humid here that the
year that I let my tomato plants Bush
out I lost them you by the end of July
they're all gone to blight because there
was not enough airflow to combat the
humidity that's just a reality of living
in Arkansas so I have begun doing my
tomatoes this way and it produces the
most for me and my plants last the
longest I want to encourage you to
experiment in your garden obviously if
you've clicked on this video you are the
kind of person who wants to find the
best way and do it that way
however while I think this is a great
method and it works great for me if you
want to go about doing this if you want
to create cattle panel trellises and you
want to space your tomatoes just like
mine and prune them just like I do do it
I hope that it is just as successful for
you as it has been for me but I do
encourage you to maybe devote a little
part of your garden and try letting it
tomato plant Bush out I did that just to
see well maybe I messed up that one year
let me try this again I let one go
completely last year and I lost it to
sickness so it kind of drove home for me
that this is the way that I need to be
doing it with my conditions don't be
afraid to fail if it means learning a
lesson you have to look at your
gardening success not just as this
and this year's harvest but over the
course of a lifetime developing methods
that work for you where you live in your
conditions in your soil in your weather
so you'll notice here I've got all of my
tomatoes and these are all slicers we
just finished planting these the day
before yesterday and so our next step is
going to be to mulch mulching is really
important when you're putting your
Tomatoes in because it helps with that
fungus thing that I was talking about in
the sickness whenever you put mulch
around your plants and not only does it
help them retain moisture it also keeps
that splashback from happening whenever
it rains another good tip with tomatoes
and just from the very beginning here
bottom water them do not water with like
a sprinkler where it's going to cause
the water to come down the more dry that
you can keep the foliage of your tomato
plants the better for their overall
health my plants here are spaced about
18 inches apart and give or take a
couple of inches I actually didn't
measure it whenever I was putting them
in an 18 inches apart that's that's
pretty close but the way that we prune
our Tomatoes is to allow them to have
one main stalk we use these cattle
panels on T posts to create these
trellis walls and essentially as these
tomato plants grow up I will do a video
later on pruning when I actually have
something to show you they're all too
small for me to show you now but I will
continue to cut off the lower branches
of these plants as they continue to grow
up and essentially once they are fully
grown and they're grown up this trellis
there will be no branches in the bottom
20 inches at least I keep that
completely free of any extra growth
because like I said we want to create
that airflow to keep these plants as
healthy as possible now we allow one
main stalk and I use a tie tape to tie
that to this trellis and I prune off any
suckers and because of the fact that we
do keep them so pruned we are able to
grow these tomatoes 18 inches apart
some Square Foot Gardening methods they
suggest growing them 12 inches apart for
me giving them that extra six inches or
so is airing a little bit on the side of
caution because like I said we do we do
deal with the humidity issue here so 18
inches apart pruned down to a single
stake and tied up to these cattle panel
trellises I do have another video
talking about growing tomatoes sharing
some of my tips and advice and just some
of the research that I've done I will
link that down below and throw a link up
here if you'd like to check it out if
you have any questions you're welcome to
put them below I also want to invite you
to please join our Facebook group it's
just a free group that we've created
it's called Friends of roots and refuge
barb and the idea is to create a
community of people who love gardening
for a support system to answer questions
and to just geek out over things like
tomatoes I do hope that this helps you
thank you so much for watching I bless
you until next time